The 4C's of diamond buying

Many people are confused about how diamonds are priced. The best
explanation is that asking for the price of a diamond is like asking
for the price of a house. A real estate agent can't quote you a price
for a house without knowing its size, condition, location, etc. This
process is the same one used when buying a diamond. A diamond's
beauty, rarity, and price depend on the interplay of all the 4Cs--cut,
clarity, carat, and color.

The 4Cs are used throughout the world to classify the rarity of
diamonds. Diamonds with the combination of the highest 4C ratings are
more rare and, consequently, more expensive. No one C is more
important than another in terms of beauty and it is important to note
that each of the 4Cs will not diminish in value over time.

Once you have established those 4C characteristics that are most
important to you, a jeweler can then begin to show you various options
with quoted prices.

THE DIAMOND QUALITY PYRAMID
A Tool to Help Understand a Diamond's Value

The Diamond Quality Pyramid is a framework to help you compare
diamonds. While all diamonds are precious, those closest to the top of
the pyramid--possessing the best combination of cut, clarity, carat
weight and color--are the earth's rarest and most valuable.

Diamond Quality Pyramid

CARAT
Refers to the weight of a diamond.

Carat is often confused with size even though it is actually a measure
of weight. One carat is equivalent to 200 milligrams. One carat can
also be divided into 100 "points." A .75 carat diamond is the same as
a 75-points or 3/4 carat diamond.

A 1-carat diamond costs exactly twice the price of a half-carat
diamond, right? Wrong. Since larger diamonds are found less frequently
in nature, which places them at the rarest level of the Diamond
Quality Pyramid, a 1-carat diamond will cost more than twice a
1/2-carat diamond (assuming color, clarity and cut remain constant).

Cut and mounting can make a diamond appear larger (or smaller) than
its actual weight. So shop around and talk to your jeweler to find the
right diamond and setting to optimize the beauty of your stone.

CLARITY
Refers to the presence of inclusions in a diamond.

Inclusions are natural identifying characteristics such as minerals or
fractures, appearing while diamonds are formed in the earth. They may
look like tiny crystals, clouds or feathers.

To view inclusions, jewelers use a magnifying loupe. This tool allows
jewelers to see a diamond at 10x its actual size so that inclusions
are easier to see. The position of inclusions can affect the value of
a diamond. There are very few flawless diamonds found in nature, thus
these diamonds are much more valuable.

Inclusions are ranked on a scale of perfection, known as clarity,
which was established by the Gemological Institute of America
(GIA). The clarity scale, ranging from F (Flawless) to Included (I),
is based on the visibility of inclusions at a magnification of 10x.

Some inclusions can be hidden by a mounting, thus having little effect
on the beauty of a diamond. An inclusion in the middle or top of a
diamond could impact the dispersion of light, sometimes making the
diamond less brilliant.

The greater a diamond's clarity, the more brilliant, valuable and rare
it is--and the higher it is on the Diamond Quality Pyramid.

COLOR
Refers to the degree to which a diamond is colorless.

Diamonds range in color from icy winter whites to warm summer
whites. Diamonds are graded on a color scale established by the
Gemological Institute of America (GIA) which ranges from D (colorless)
to Z.

Warmer colored diamonds (K-Z) are particularly desirable when set in
yellow gold. Icy winter whites (D-J) look stunning set in white gold
or platinum.

Color differences are very subtle and it is very difficult to see the
difference between, say, an E and an F. Therefore, colors are graded
under controlled lighting conditions and are compared to a master set
for accuracy.

Truly colorless stones, graded D, treasured for their rarity, are
highest on the Diamond Quality Pyramid. Color, however, ultimately
comes down to personal taste. Ask a jeweler to show you a variety of
color grades next to one another to help you determine your color
preference.


CUT
Refers to the angles and proportions of a diamond.

Based on scientific formulas, a well-cut diamond will internally
reflect light from one mirror-like facet to another and disperse and
reflect it through the top of the stone. This results in a display of
brilliance and fire, thereby placing well-cut diamonds higher on the
Diamond Quality Pyramid than deep or shallow-cut diamonds. Diamonds
that are cut too deep or too shallow lose or leak light through the
side or bottom, resulting in less brilliance and ultimately, value.

Cut also refers to shape--round, square, pear, or heart for
example. Since a round diamond is symmetrical and capable of
reflecting nearly all the light that enters, it is the most brilliant
of all diamond shapes and follows specific proportional
guidelines. Ask a jeweler to find out more about these guidelines.

